Now,
let me pick one
up. Okay, Mr. Jacob, you've written both science fiction and fantasy. Which do you prefer to write? Oh, one thing I should mention. You addressed me as Mr. Jacob. I have had nothing published under that name. It's all,
here's Anthony. So that if you're reproducing this, you should refer to it as Anthony or people will not know who you're talking about. Okay, it's much easier. It's hard to remember the Jacob, quite frankly. Okay.
Okay, you're asking which I prefer, science fiction and fantasy. And I have to give a complicated answer to that because it has different facets. For the challenge, for the sheer joy of getting in and tackling a
difficult problem and surmounting it, science fiction is better. But... If I need money, it's fantasy. I make my money on fantasy, and it's very easy to do. So that it depends on what I really want. If I want to do
something that I will feel will live after me and really be worth my effort, then it is science fiction. But right now I would say, oh, about three quarters of my money is being made in a fantasy. So that it is a certain
pleasure to be able to do something like that and just be richly rewarded for it. Not so much intellectually, but I can't just ignore the financial aspect. It's nice to be paid well as well. For a number of years, I was
just scraping along on science fiction, doing what I wanted to, but not doing well financially. So that may not be precisely the answer you want, but there is this very sharp division between them. Actually, I do enjoy
each when I get into it. whatever genre or whatever project I get into, I do the very best I can, and I'm generally satisfied that I've done the best that I can in that particular genre. There are different thrusts, you
might say. In all this discussion, have I managed to answer? That's exactly what I wanted. Mainly, it's commercial, I gather. There's just an economic reason for doing it. Economic? It's fantasy, yes. There is. What
is the difference? Do more people buy the fantasy books than buy the science fiction books? Yes. For the decade or so that I wrote science fiction, before I got into fantasy in any big way, I would have sales of 50,000,
60,000 copies, 100,000. And some over the years, some of my better ones would build up beyond that. I've only been into fantasy for the past five years, and they're already selling in the quarter million copies of
class. I think my first recent fantasy, A Spell for Chameleon, has now sold about 280,000 copies. So it's just much bigger than the science fiction, much faster and much more.
Why do you think there seems to be a fantasy craze now? Why do people snarf up the fantasy books more than the science fiction books of you or any other author? That's something that a lot of people are speculating on now.
And my answer may be fairly simple, and others may not agree with it. For a number of years, there simply wasn't much market for fantasy, and everybody knew it, so nobody wrote it. And Delray Books decided to take a
plunge and get into fantasy in a big way. They tried to get good new authors. They tried to get old ones to convert over and do serious, well-written fantasy. I was one of the ones that shifted over from science fiction to
fantasy. And apparently it worked, because now most of the best-selling fantasy is with this one publisher, Del Rey Books. And I conjecture that they took the plunge, and it worked. When fantasy was given the same
push that science fiction was, it had the same success and now is being carried on, perhaps, on momentum beyond the science fiction levels. Now, most people will tell you there's a deep philosophical aspect that
somehow people crave fantasy when they don't crave science fiction. But I don't see that the world has changed that much in five years to make People suddenly crave a genre that they didn't want before. I think, again,
the answer has to be in the commercial aspect, in the push, in the advertising, in the promotion that they give the novels. I think people just didn't know about fantasy before. As I said, this is not an answer most
people will give you, and I'm not sure whether it's accurate. It's just my theory. How did you decide to write fantasy, to take the plunge in your career? It was almost entirely coincidental. It's a long history. I'll
try to digest this down. I've had a good deal of trouble in the genres because I stand up for my rights. One publisher was sending me, well, they sent me statements of account that were simply not true. They were wrong.
And I knew they were wrong. demanding a correct statement and correct payments. And rather than do that, they blacklisted me. For six years, they would not publish anything by me. And this happened to be Ballantyne
Books. What changed in six years was that the administration there changed. And new editors came in that weren't interested in blacklisting me. They happened to know that I had had the right of it. But by that time, in
that six years, I had gotten in with other publishers. And I don't know if you're familiar with this. There's an option clause in most contracts that say, in general, we reserve the right to publish or to approve and
have the first purchase rights on this author's next piece of fiction. If they buy it, then they put the clause in the next contract, and so on, so that you're locked into one publisher. I was locked into Avon Books on
science fiction. Avon is where I went after Ballantyne Books blacklisted me. With the new administration at Ballantyne Books, I wanted to try them out. I wanted to see if they really had changed and do a novel for them,
but I couldn't legally do science fiction. So I said, well, supposing I try fantasy? I haven't done any. I don't know if it'll work, but if you're willing... It happened that Lester Del Rey was the fantasy editor. I knew
him. I'd met him. I liked him. I like his kind of editing. So on that basis, I got into fantasy. Again, it was a commercial decision. And then when I tried it, I discovered I liked it. And then it went from there. What was
your first fantasy effort? Okay, the first, the modern one, okay, the very first one I did and put into print was a novel called Hassan. And that took some years to get into print. I wrote it back in 1968. It was an
adaptation of an Arabian Nights fantasy tale that I admired. And I did some research and brought it up and fleshed it out and made it into a novel. It was published serially in Fantastic Magazine back in 1968 or 1969,
1970, somewhere in there. Couldn't get book publication. But more recently, when I say with the option complication or Ballantyne books, I simply started a whole new framework for fantasy. And that's when I did a
spell for chameleon. And this is what really dates my fantasy. That is, I had done the one novel before, but that never got me established in fantasy. I wasn't known as a fantasy writer. And I regard it more as a fantasy. I
wouldn't say a fluke. I worked hard on that novel. It was just something I did and did not return to. So that my first fantasy that got me really established as a fantasy writer was A Spell for Chameleon, the first Sands
novel. The Xanth novels, I believe it would be an understatement to say, have been successful. Did you conceive of that as a series, or did it just start building in your mind when you started writing A Spell for
Chameleon? No, it was no series. It was an individual novel that I did to try out a publisher and an editor. For all I knew, it would be just one novel that would never repeat. But then it worked so well. I liked it, and the
editor liked it. You see, this is a two-way street. The author has to like doing something, but the editor also has to like his work. So before it was published, the editor said, will you do another fantasy for us? And he
was not thinking of another in the same framework, and neither was I. But when I got to thinking about it and working out and trying to find another fantasy setup, I realized that there was more that I wanted to say about
the land of Zant. I sort of liked it. So I asked them if it would be all right to do another one in that framework. And I think a little bit reluctantly, the editor agreed, and we did it. And then the thing was almost a
bestseller. It did very well in that pretty well-established Zant as a series. It just kept on going. We did a third one, said let's wrap it up as a trilogy and not do any more. But then the reader started demanding more
and more and more and more. both the publisher and the author. It's hard to say no when the readers are begging for more, really. And so we have gone along, and it's been very rewarding, actually. How many books are
projected for the series now? Well, I think of it as an open-ended series. I've actually written seven. I'm finishing the seventh one now. I'm actually typing it right now. and I have two more that I'm thinking of. As
you see, there are four in print, but there will be two more coming out later this year, bringing it up to six, and then the seventh will appear about a year later. And I think as long as the market holds up, as long as
there's demand, I'll probably do one more Zanth novel a year, just indefinitely. When people get tired of Zanth and the sales go down, we'll quit. So it really has no end. I suspect that it may go one novel a year for the
next 20 years. I don't know. I get the idea when reading the Xanth novels that you must be having a lot of fun when you're writing them because of, well, the puns and the jokes and everything. They're really great. Yes, I
do have fun. And I say it's not what I regard great literature. It's not terrifically challenging. But it has... two things going for it. One is that it pays very well, and that's all in a recession like this. It helps to
have something you know will pay. And the other is that it is an awful lot of fun to do. I can just get there and sort of relax. You know, it's like being at home with your shoes off and just relaxing and enjoying yourself. I
enjoy it more than just about anything else. But as I said, I like to do something with challenge so that I don't want to do nothing but sense. But in between other novels, it's very nice to come back and just let myself go
and work out puns that nobody else would tolerate. They're all right. And I probably enjoy writing them as much as my readers enjoy reading them. Do you have any plans to write any science fiction books in the near
future? Yes. This is another long story, and you'll probably have to edit this soon. No problem.
In one of my most recently published science fiction novels, Viscous Circle, I had a long author's note explaining why I probably would not be writing much science fiction. Actually, a number of my readers have been
commenting. They thought that I meant I wouldn't write any fantastic stuff. Actually, I was writing fantasy, but I planned to ease off on science fiction because I seemed to have lost a sense of wonder for it. If I don't
enjoy doing it, I don't want to do it. I talk about in Santa, I do it for money, but I also enjoy it. If I didn't enjoy it, I wouldn't do it for the money. But with science fiction, I just wasn't enjoying it so much. So I decided
to go out and try a challenge in other areas. I wanted to work on a World War II novel, for example, with historical and mainstream, all these other genres, go out and try these things. while I'm still young enough and
have my abilities with me so that I can tackle new things. But I discovered that in the past two years, there's nobody out there that's interested in my non-science fiction or fantasy work. World War II novel, nobody
wants it. Historical, nobody wants it. Nobody wants anything I do if it's not science fiction or fantasy. Now, I don't say I like this situation, but I have to live with it. I can't sell outside of the genre. It has
nothing to do with how good a writer I may be. If I listen to my fans within the genre, they think I'm one of the best. But outside, they couldn't care less. They're just not interested. So if I'm going to write at all, I have
to write within the genre. So wrestling with this reality, and I pride myself on being able to face reality, realized that unless I wanted to do 100% fantasy, I would have to return and find a way to do science fiction and
still satisfy myself. But when I thought it out, I realized that the boundaries of both science fiction and fantasy are very tenuous. You can call almost anything, one genre or the other, if you phrase it correctly. So
in effect, What I did was stretch the boundaries of science fiction so that they would include the mainstream material that I really wanted to work on. And as a result, I have now sold to Avon Books a five novel science
fiction series that is really a mainstream series closed to science fiction It's not that it doesn't have the science fiction trappings. It's very hard science, and nobody would ever confuse it. But that the message
in it, the theme, it's a mainstream theme. I'm dealing with the problems of the world and possible solutions to them. It could almost be written as an essay, except that I am phrasing it as what I call space opera. That is
just the original space opera is rather shallow material, where it's like a horse opera. You have a cowboy on his horse galloping off. He pulls out a six-gun. He shoots the bad guy. He gets the girl, and everybody's
happy. You translate this into science fiction, and it's called space opera. He gets into a spaceship. He pulls out his blaster. He gets the girl. Everybody's happy. Using this space opera science fiction
framework, I'm actually doing considerable commentary, not on Western times, but on contemporary times. That is, if you translate it from science fiction into the present, which you can easily do.
Let's see. I'm getting my thoughts all mixed up here. The fact is that although this is set in the solar system, planet Jupiter, for example, translates very readily to the United States. And when I talk about Jupiter
and the Jupiter Space Navy, I'm talking about the United States and its military arm. And once a person has the key, you can discover that I'm telling a contemporary story. Now, many readers, perhaps the majority,
will not see the key, and they'll just read it as straight science fiction adventure, which it is. It's hard-hitting adventure. It's about as effective an adventure as I've ever done. When I went to the publisher with
this idea, I said, look, supposing someone tried to write space opera, who could really write? might sound conceited, suggest that other space opera writers didn't know how to write. But as may be apparent in this
interview, I have a fairly high regard for my own abilities. I feel I am a good writer, and that if I tackle space opera, I could do a better job than most people before me have done. And that's what I'm trying to prove,
among other things. So long, long, long answer here. I am back into science fiction. There'll be at least five novels, one a year. It will be hard-hitting, but it does have more of a message, more of a theme, more
relevance to today than Sants, for example, does, or almost anything else. And I'm a little worried. If too many people catch on to the relevance, they may not like it, because many of my readers don't want messages.
They don't want to be educated. But for those that do, that are interested in some philosophic or educational content, it's here. It's definitely here, and that pleases me. So I think I am succeeding in doing what I
wanted to without having to leave the genre. I hope that's not too confused an answer. No, no. None of the people here listening disagree with your assessment of your writing abilities. Let's see. I thought I had a high
opinion, thought I was a good writer, and they disagree with that. No, we agree. We agree with you. So the kick in writing this new series, then, is this kind of coding the present-day situation into a space opera
situation. I wanted to do some more relevant comment. You haven't asked a question on this, but I'll give you the answer anyway. I'd just like to think that I'm on Earth for some purpose other than just to feed my face. I
want to do something and try to leave the universe a better place than it was when I came into it. If there's anything in my power I can do to improve things, then I want to do it. And I try to do this through the ability that I
have as a writer. And so I want to write, in the guise of fiction, to write material that people will read and become better persons or get ideas that they wouldn't have. I've had some comments from fans saying that after
reading some of my novels, they're thinking of the Split Infinity series, They've decided that honesty is the best policy. Now they admire honesty. Well, that pleases me. That's the kind of thing I want to do. If a
person was planning to be dishonest and he reads one of my novels and then he decides that he really would rather be honest, I believe in honesty. I want to encourage it. I think there should be more of it in the world. So I
am trying to have a beneficial effect. You might say to justify my own existence. I'm making money at it, yes. But while I'm making the money, I also want to do something that, well, when I die, I can look back and say I have
done something useful in the world. So this is why I'm not satisfied just to write and get paid for it and not to worry about the theme or the content. I want to do something that I can be satisfied with, that I can be proud
of, and that will help people. You have alluded several times to the fact that your fans asked you to do this and your fans said that. I take it that you either correspond with fans or you do get quite a bit of fan mail and
that you are responsive to it. Yes. It's a funny thing. I've never gone to a convention. I've never met people personally that way, mainly because I don't like to travel and I do like to write. But I do answer my mail.
Yesterday I... Yesterday, sorry. For last month, I simply went back and counted up the letters I had written. It was 64 letters. I had to take off all weekends just to answer my fan mail. This is a problem. If it gets much
worse, I'm going to have to start slacking off on that because it takes me too long to finish a novel if I have to keep taking time off to answer the letters. But I am responsive. I do read them. I think about them each as an
individual letter. relating to what the fan has told me, what his needs are. You see, many of my letters are from children, 9, 10, 11, 12 years old. And I think it's very important to them that I do answer them. When I was
that age, I didn't like to be ignored when something was important to me. So it's the golden rule. I try to treat them as I wish I had been treated. And I don't... You might say, well, what does a guy 10 years old have to tell
me? Well, actually, he can tell me how he feels, how he reacts, how important it is, and what influence my novelist had on him. He will do so with a lot more candor than an adult will, because he's not trying to impress me.
He's just telling me what he likes. He doesn't have the art to be, you know, for duplicity. So that it's a little like animal psychology. You can see the human motives in animals because the animals don't know enough to
conceal them. So I value these letters. I sometimes wish I just had more time if I could have full time for writing and also full time for answering letters. So it's been mostly this year, considerable correspondence
developing. And I would say 50% or 60% of it is by people under the age of, say, 18. It's mostly young readers that I get. Let's see, again, I hope I answered your question there. As you may notice, I can get to talking and I
can wander so far on the subject that I forget what it is. And I regret that, but it's just the way I am. Don't regret it. That's what makes the interviews very interesting. I always have a lot to say, and I have more to say
than I can say, and I get wandering and get lost. See, I'm not following my outline either. So, in fact, I'm going to work backwards instead of forwards. Yeah. Editorial comment, that's really nice about writing to the
kids because I know that means a lot to them. Okay, the science fiction that you did immediately before fantasy was the cluster books. I assume that's an appropriate way to categorize them. have a novelty and a
creativity there like nothing I'd ever seen before in your writing or really in anything else. In fact, that seems to be blurred between fantasy and science fiction. How did you conceive of that series? Did you
conceive of it as a series and then it just kind of went the way of the Xanth series? Yes, this is another one of these involved stories. I should say that I regard the cluster novels as science fantasy. The science in it is
not real. I doubt that we'll ever have faster than light communication, for example. So that they call it science fiction. Actually, I regard most of science fiction that I or anybody else has been publishing as
science fantasy. I don't want to get off too far on this, but people talk about Larry Niven, for example, as a hard science fiction writer. I could pick his science apart. He's a science fantasy writer. Most of them are.
So that cluster... is science fantasy, and I can't really justify the science in it. My upcoming series will be science fiction. It has no fantasy at all. It's not science fantasy. Okay, that was a diversion from the
question I'm about to try to... You better rephrase the question. I have indeed lost it. Okay, the Cluster series started out as a trilogy, and then the related books... How did I get into that? Exactly. And... for
purely irrelevant reasons. I'd like to say that I just sat down and said, let's do something constructive. In this case, it wasn't. You may have heard the name of Roger Elwood. I interviewed him about two weeks ago.
Okay. Put this in a capsule. He did a lot of story editing, and then he got into novels, and there must have been 100 or so novels that he did. He got quite a program there. But candidly, I do not regard him as a good editor. In
fact, I was one that helped put him out of business because of what he did to one of my novels. But before this happened, he wrote to me and said, look, you're a good writer. Why don't you do something really big like
Asimov's Foundation trilogy? See what you can do. Well, that appealed to me. I've been an admirer of the Foundation Trilogy since my youth. Can you hear me? I hear a lot of noise on the line. Yeah, I can hear the noise.
Just go ahead. I think we'll be able to filter it out. Okay. And when I read something that I admire, sometimes I like to rise to the challenge and see if I can match it. Not copying it, just to see if I can do something of
similar scope and importance. So... I settled down, and in the course of an hour, I conceived the initial cluster trilogy. It's now five novels, but it started out as a trilogy, worked it up, and presented it as a
trilogy to Roger Elwood, and he rejected it. Now, I feel that I had presented to him exactly what he asked for. Unfortunately, he, like many editors, if there's one thing an editor will reject, it's what he asks for. I
don't know why this is. So I went ahead and sold it to Avon. They published it, and it's been highly successful ever since. And I'd like to tell people now that the Cluster Trilogy is a project I worked up for Elwood and did
it without him. You can judge the quality of it. The one novel I did for him was one called But What of Earth that got illegally rendered into a collaboration, and I don't recommend it to people at all. I regard it. as a poor
novel, the way it finally was presented. That's an example of what I was able to do with Elwood. For me, I was better off without him, but the Cluster Trilogy was conceived for Roger Elwood, believe it or not. That is
where it started. The...
Tarot religion figured very heavily in the Cluster series. When did you decide to do the sidebar novels, the trilogy telling us about the tarot religion? Okay, first, that's not a trilogy. It was one quarter million
word novel. I wrote it in one piece. And publishers balk at size. I don't know why. In mainstream, people can get quarter million word novels published and they're best sellers. But in science fiction, they wouldn't
do it for me. as they insisted on breaking it up. Well, my agent and I fought this. We even went to the extent of taking about a 30% cut in the payment for the sole reason to have it published as one novel. So they gave us the, I
think they'd offered $15,000, and they cut it to $11,500 for it and signed the agreement that they would publish it as one novel, whereupon they broke it up. into three. They didn't give me back the money. And the
publisher published the first third of it and went out of business. That was Jove. Jove was brought out by the combine that Berkeley was part of. Berkeley went ahead, published the other two novels in a different year
so that I couldn't even get my novel published in one year. It bothered me because I feel that this is the major novel of my career. Split into three parts and divided between two years It washed me out totally. I had no
chance to make a run for any awards or anything like that. It was simply gone, which is what tends to happen to my more important work. So I'm rather put out about this because I felt the major work of my career was
virtually destroyed by the publisher. Not that the publisher set out to do that, but I mean by the publisher going out of business right in the middle of my novel by refusing to honor the original commitment. Part of the
agreement was when they finally broke it up, I had them sign a paper saying, all right, if you've got to break it up, you've got to, but never will this be referred to as a trilogy because it's not. See, when I write a novel,
it's complete. I tie up the loose ends. And to publish a third of a novel and then call it a full novel in itself, that's just not the way I write. Other people write that way. I'm aware of it. I don't. I like to wrap up my loose
ends. As it happened, I saw a review of it, the first third. The reviewer never even realized it was only a third of a novel. So apparently he's used to seeing these fragments. So I'd rather put out about the way tarot
worked. But as for the writing of the novel itself, it was worked up for another publisher that never took it. And in combination with material that a religious group had sent me, I had met one of their people, admired
his attitude. It was a small religion. They want to be anonymous, so I keep them anonymous. And he wrote to his home office, and they sent me about half a million words of background material on their philosophy, on
their beliefs. And I looked through this and said, this is worth putting in a novel. This is worth immortalizing to whatever extent I can. I based a novel on it. Part of that material was the tarot. I think I've heard of
tarot before, but I'd never seen a deck. I'd never paid any attention. I just understood it was just a minor fortune-telling deck of cards, and that was it. But when I actually saw the images, I started looking at the
cards, such as death, and it really came across to me This is a unique deck. It's quite different from the ordinary card playing deck. I bought a deck of my own, tried spreading out a reading, and it was amazing. I should
say, I don't believe in the supernatural. I have absolutely no belief in anything supernatural. So I try these things as an experiment. I said, OK, let's ask a question and lay out according to the formula and see what
the cards say. And the cards answered my questions. And this got to me. I said, if I don't believe in the supernatural, how can the supernatural agency work for me? And again, by the time I finished figuring that out, I
had a novel on hand. I think I did figure out how it worked. I regard it as a psychological tool, not as a supernatural one. But it is a good one. It relates to Bershock, I think. You know, the inkblabs where they analyze.
People tell stories about them. I think the cards, the symbols, do this even better. So that originally, through this religious group that was just showing me its material, they introduced me to the tarot and to other
concepts, and I simply went ahead and worked with those and put them into the novel that became tarot. It's unfortunate that when I sent a copy of the manuscript to the elders, or whatever you call it, of this religion,
They cut off all communication. Apparently they didn't like it, and I've never heard from them since. So apparently they do not feel that I succeeded in presenting their philosophy. I've had comments from people of
other religions saying, hey, we really believe in this. Is there such a religion? We'd like to join it. But the one that it was actually based on apparently does not at all like it. That's been one of my regrets, that in
that sense I failed. I thought I was presenting their philosophy And it's evident that I did not. So you might say in that sense, the tarot is a failure, even though commercially and critically it's been a success, I
would say. So what came first, the tarot religion or the cluster trilogy which incorporated it? And then you went back and explained what it was. I was doing the research. See, I work ahead. And so I was doing research
and looking at things and just studying things in general. I'd like to say now I learn more each year than I ever did in school or college, just because I like knowledge. And so I was working on the cluster novels at this
time, and this material suddenly gave a new direction to it. So I put in tarot scenes, one major scene, one chapter in each of the cluster novels. It had not originally been there, and I built. I merged the... the
frameworks, the tarot is in the cluster framework, and the tarot material appears in the cluster novels. It was a kind of amazing, you might say, of two ideas, the tarot idea and the framework that I had already
developed for the cluster novels.
I was glad to hear you say while I go that this is one of your favorite works, because my question 13 says, in some ways, this is my favorite of your work, because I really enjoyed it. And I think the part I really enjoyed
more than anything was in the middle book, Vision of Tarot, when Paul and Carolyn went back to Earth or whatever and had their experiences. And I always kind of interpreted that as it might be a little bit
autobiographical. Is there any autobiography in there? Yes, right on target. When I had sold the novel, I had... I should back off here and explain that I no longer write novels and then sell them. I sell them, and then I
write them. I do a summary of what I propose to do. And if I get a contract on it, then I go ahead and write it. That's the way I sold Cluster. I sell all of them that way now. So I had a contract for it, and I was getting ready to
work on it. I was, at that point, invited to go back to my alma mater, the college I have my BA in writing from. professor who had worked with me on the writing asked me to come back and talk to them. And because he asked me and
I felt I owed him from, well, he'd helped me in various ways. I was a naturalized citizen. I was a British subject. And he helped serve as a witness for character for me so that I could become an American citizen. I mean,
these are not things that I forget. So that although I don't like to travel, I like to stay home, I said, this time I'll do it. And so I went there. And because I like to have my children have good experiences, I took my
eight-year-old, she was then eight years old, daughter along with me in that way. She got to ride in the airplane. She got to see the college. She got to meet people. She got a lot of good experience. Well, that
experience became those two central chapters. That college is my college. I didn't name it. It's dangerous to name things. You can get sued. However, the professor, Will Hamlin, is real. I used his name with his
permission and sent him a copy of the novel when it was published. The college is as described. The events are as described. It is a summary of my own life there. I was suspended from it. I felt unfairly. And that, I think,
comes through. When we came back, the airline refused to honor my ticket. It was a valid ticket. It had been paid for. I had a confirmed reservation, paid for two weeks in advance. They wouldn't let me on the airplane. It
turned out to be a mix-up, but I had to go and get another airplane to get back. My daughter and I were almost stranded up there in New England, so that I simply put this into the novel and hoped that it didn't stand out as too
much in contrast with with the rest of it. I had read a section of the very first chapter I had already written at that point. I read it to them there at the college, and then went ahead and put the college experience into a
later segment of the novel. So that in my novels, some of them are totally fantastic, and others have a great deal of my personal life in them. And in the case of Tarot, Most of it is fantastic in the sense that it's created
as a work of fantasy or science fiction. In this case, the boundary is obscure. But some of it relates to my own life and relates most directly. Those two chapters do. There's another episode, A Day in the Life of an
Eight-Year-Old Boy. That's me. I didn't have a happy childhood, and the nature of that childhood is covered in that. That's in the third volume, I think, part of the health sequence, so that I am in there in certain
selected areas. I'm pleased if you actually liked that section. I was afraid I would get criticized, and people wouldn't like it, and say, what's this business about college doing in a science fiction novel? But so
far, nobody's objected. One person who had been an instructor at a college and left it for philosophic reasons, commented on that section, said how much it related to his own experience. Apparently, these
internecine politics come in all over, and people leave or are suspended or given poor grades, whatever you want. In my case, there were not, well, The grades are a whole different subject as covered in the novel. It is
true that I went through four years of college without ever receiving a grade, and then discovered later that I had, in fact, been covertly graded. And I thought that was a great violation of their compact with me and
with the other students. And I put the hurt into that novel. I do not like being deceived. I don't like it at all. I resent it very strongly in this particular case. I felt the college had a lot better than they knew. I felt
they had a good system. I just wish they had believed in it themselves. Some of this is a little like the post office. I wish they really believed in the zip code and used it, but they don't. Some systems are good if they're
used, and the people that are supposed to use them show that they don't really believe in themselves.
I'm curious how much fan response you got from the tarot novel. I, for one, got more mileage out of telling the joke about Brigham Young ought to be hung than about any other joke I've ever read. But I would think that some
people could, if they looked hard enough, could get offended at that. Did you get much mail on that? I expected to get hate mail from the Mormons, although I was not portraying them negatively. had zero mail from that
direction. I doubt if they read much science fiction, really. I think that's the case. And I've had a number of letters over the years on tarot. Most of them are concerned with the tarot deck. If we haven't gotten into
the deck, then I tried to understand it and then work up a deck that would suit my purposes because the regular ones did not. So I worked out. I did research, found out what I thought were the true origins of the tarot,
built that into fiction, Those origins, that notion was not original with me. It was a result of the research that convinced me. And so most of the fan letters there are saying, is there a deck being published or what
about this? And some people are drawing up illustrations for the deck.
Right now, I have a letter I have to answer to someone that wishes to make a comic book, a series of comic books out of the first volume of the Tarot novel. Somebody else does want to publish The animation tarot is a deck.
Work it up. So my correspondence has been mostly, you might say, technical, that nature. Sometimes I dread it when I see a letter come through Berkeley Books, which means that it's tarot because that's the only one I
have in print. Well, I have another novel in print with them, but mainly it's tarot. I dread it, not because I don't like the mail, but because I know that I'm likely to sit down for an hour and digest a complicated and
thoughtful letter. It's really much easier to digest a Zant letter where a typical letter just says, gee, I'm 11 years old. You're the best writer in the world. Please send me your autograph. And I send the letters back
saying, that's very nice to hear from you. I'm glad you like it. And here's my signature. That takes me about 15 minutes. With a tarot, I can't do a tarot letter in 15 minutes. I have to dig out my mocked up deck. I have to
check references and deal with people that know more about the subject than I do. That's always awkward. But as far as hate mail, I haven't had any hate mail. Matter of fact, I haven't had any hate mail on anything in the
last five years or so. Only hate letter I ever got, I think, based on a martial arts series I did some years ago. We had a comment about Bruce Lee, then popular in martial arts, about how these things were faked up, having
impossible jumps and so on, and why do that when I've been in judo and so on. I mean, these are good martial arts. They don't need to be faked up to be effective. That was the nature of the comments in those novels. And I had a
hate letter on that saying, you, you, well, you know, it was an unsigned four letter vernacular type letter. The very idea that we should criticize Bruce Lee hated it. And that's about the only hate letter I've had, I
think. The books we've talked about so far, the series, as a reader, I appreciated the covers, the Wolatsky covers on the Cluster books, the Rowena covers on the Tarots. Rowena, nice covers. Yeah, and then I liked the
various Xanth books. Do you pay attention to what the cover looks like, and do you like them or dislike them? I pay attention, but I have absolutely no control over it. I think British covers are better. They seem to have
more taste. and they're doing them for the Tarot volumes now, I think better covers than the American ones. No, the publisher decides what the cover theme is going to be and assigns the artist, and I find out when the
book is published, or sometimes they'll send me a cover proof just for my information. I have no veto power or anything. So in the contract, it's their power, and I simply don't hassle them about it. The fact is,
sometimes I am displeased with covers. I saw a book of mine once republished in Europe. They took the cover from the American edition of a Philip Jose Farmer novel and put it on my book. I mean, I recognize it. I had the
book, you see. So now I think Philip Jose Farmer is a fine writer. But I don't want his cover on my novel. I'm sure he doesn't want it either. I mean, that's all some of these publishers care about covers. They'll just
reuse one from an old novel and figure, I mean, not even by the same author. You can tell that it wouldn't be relevant to the new novel. I don't like that sort of thing. But again, I have no control. In the case of that, that
was for a German translation. I wrote to my agent and said, why did they do this? Aren't they aware that it's not even a... I mean, people are going to recognize this farmer cover. And they wrote back and said, well, the
cover on the... British edition was too severe for the German taste. The Germans were, you know, delicate people, and they couldn't have a cover that was too violent. I just wrote back and said, who do you think you're
kidding, and let it go. Nothing I could do. I was wondering what it's like to see an artist's rendition of your character. Does it ever match your idea? Depends on the artist. Some artists are very good. This art Rowena
is very good. And some of them aren't even to my novel. They have no relevance. So it's like playing roulette, really, a cover. I wish I had more control. I have no control. I wish I had some. Because for eight years, I was
trying to be an artist. I gave it up and turned to writing because I felt my skill was not enough. For me ever to be a commercial or a professional artist, I wasn't that good. So I shifted to words. And as it turned out, after
another eight years, I became good enough to sell. It took me eight years of writing before I sold anything. So for me, words were the better medium. But I do know something about art. I did hope to be a painter myself
someday. I feel competent to judge whether a cover is relevant and good or whether it's bad. And with me, I think it's about 50% of the covers of my books are good, and about 50% I could just about do better myself. Okay.
We're at the end of our tape.